DOPPLER EFFECT LESSON
Background
Almost everyone has experienced the Doppler effect, though perhaps without knowing what caused it. For example, imagine you are standing on a street corner as a fire truck approaches with its siren blaring. The perceived pitch of the siren will sound higher as it comes closer to you. Then, as it passes by, the pitch will sound lower. This is one of many examples of the Doppler effect: The change in how sounds are perceived due to movement.

Sound Waves
Why does this change occur? Movement changes the way different characteristics of sound waves are perceived, and therefore, how the sound is perceived. Sound waves have two primary characteristics: frequency and wavelength. As we will see, movement causes changes in how we perceive the frequency and length of sound waves, which ultimately impact how we perceive the sound. First, let us briefly go over each of these characteristics.

Wave Frequency
Wave frequency refers to the number of waves passing through a given point during 1 s. It corresponds to how we perceive the pitch of a sound: If waves occur at a high frequency, they will produce a high pitch; if waves occur at a low frequency, they will produce a low pitch. For example, the cry of a baby has a relatively high pitch, whereas the sound of thunder has a relatively low pitch. The reason these two sounds are perceived differently is because they have different wave frequencies. Figures 1 and 2 below illustrate the difference between low and high frequency sound waves.

Wavelength
Closely related to wave frequency is wavelength. Wavelength refers to the distance between adjacent waves (see figures above). As you might expect, longer waves require more time to travel a given distance than do shorter waves. Consequently, longer sound waves have a lower frequency and a lower pitch. On the other hand, short sound waves have a higher frequency and higher pitch.

How the Doppler Effect Works
The Doppler effect is about movement influencing how the frequency and length of sound waves are perceived. To illustrate this, imagine a bug jiggling on the surface of a pond. If the bug is stationary, the waves on the surface of the water around it will be at the same frequency and length in all directions, as in Figure 3 below. Now suppose that the bug begins moving to the right. The waves it produces become shorter and more frequent to the right of the bug and longer and less frequent to the left of the bug, as shown in Figure 4 below.
Now, let us relate the bug example to how the Doppler effect occurs in sound waves. Imagine again that a fire truck is approaching with its siren blaring, as illustrated in Figure 5 below. As the fire truck approaches, the sound waves between the fire truck and the girl becomeshorterandmorefrequent, resultingin ahigherperceivedpitch. As the fire truck drives by, the sound waves between the fire truck and the girl are longer and less frequent. As a result, the girl perceives the pitch as getting lower. This is because the movement of the fire truck causes changes in how the sound is perceived. This influence of movement on perceived sound is the core principle of the Doppler effect.
